packages/reference/docs/types/effects.md, before:

---
order: 280
---

# Effects

Effects are resumable exceptions. They capture side-effects in the type system
so that functions must either expose them in their signature or handle them.

Current backend status: Voyd currently materializes effects through the
`gc-trampoline` backend. The `stack-switch` backend is planned but not yet
implemented.

## At a Glance

- Effects bundle named operations that may suspend and resume execution.
- Operation behavior is signaled by the first parameter:
  - `resume` means resumable; the handler may resume zero or one time.
  - `tail` means tail-resumptive; the handler must resume exactly once before returning or propagating another effect.
- Function types carry an effect row: `fn load(): (Async, Log) -> Bytes`.
- Effects are inferred locally, but exported APIs should **spell them out** or
  handle everything and remain pure (`()`).
- Effect rows can be polymorphic: `fn map<effects E>(f: fn(T): E -> U): E -> Array<U>`.
- Handlers remove handled effects from the row; unhandled effects propagate.
- Effects don’t “poison” the call stack: higher-order code can stay pure and
  let callbacks carry or discharge their own effects.

Voyd's effect system takes heavy inspiration from:
- [Koka Language](https://koka-lang.github.io)
- [Effeckt Language](https://effekt-lang.org/)
- [Structured Asynchrony with Algebraic Effects (Daan Leijen)](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/asynceffects-msr-tr-2017-21.pdf)

---

## Declaring Effects

An effect is a set of named operations:

```voyd
eff Exception
  // Resumable operation; the handler may resume zero or one time.
  fn throw(resume, msg: String) -> void

// Single-operation shorthand
eff throw(resume, msg: String) -> void

eff State
  // Tail-resumptive operations; the handler will resume exactly once.
  fn get(tail) -> Int
  fn set(tail, x: Int) -> void

// Single-operation shorthand
eff get(tail) -> Int
```

Operations that start with a `resume` parameter expose the current continuation
to the handler and may be resumed zero or one time. Operations that start with a
`tail` parameter are tail-resumptive (like `await` or `yield from`) and are
guaranteed to resume exactly once by the handler before any clause exit or effect
propagation.

### Effect ID Convention

For public/stable effects, use dotted stable capability IDs:

```voyd
@effect(id: "voyd.std.fs")
eff Fs
```

Use this shape consistently:
- `"<owner>.<package>.<capability>"`
- `owner` is the organization/ecosystem namespace (`voyd` for std).
- `capability` is a stable semantic namespace, not a required mirror of file/module paths.
- Use lowercase ASCII tokens (`a-z0-9` + `.`).

Why this is preferred over reverse-DNS-like examples such as
`"com.example.generic"`:
- It aligns with Voyd imports and module organization.
- It is easier to grep, audit, and refactor in-repo.
- It keeps effect IDs predictable across std, compiler, SDK, and tests.
- It preserves external contracts even when modules are moved or renamed.

Stability rule:
- Once a public effect ID ships, treat it as persistent API surface and do not
  change it for internal refactors.

`"com.example.*"` IDs are still valid, but they are not the repository standard.

---

## Raising and Handling Effects

```voyd
eff Async
  await(tail) -> i32
  resolve(resume, value: i32) -> void
  reject(resume, msg: String) -> void

fn async_task(): Async -> i32
  let num = Async::await()
  if num > 0:
    Async::resolve(num)
  else:
    Async::reject("Number must be positive")

fn main(): () -> void
  try
    async_task(1)
  await(tail):
    tail(rand_int())
  resolve(resume, num):
    log("Resolved: " + num)
  reject(resume, msg):
    log("Rejected: " + msg)
```

Notes:
- Effect operations are invoked like static functions (`Async::resolve`), or by
  importing them: `use Async::{resolve, reject}`.
- Unhandled operations propagate to the caller and stay in the function's effect
  row. Handled operations are removed from the row.
- A handler may re-raise an effect (keeping it in the row) or fully discharge
  it.
- `resume` is one-shot: handlers may resume zero or one time; a second resume
  traps at runtime.
- `tail` resumes are strict: each `tail` continuation must be resumed exactly
  once before the clause returns or propagates another effect. Missing or double
  resumes trap at runtime.
- Handlers are written as clauses after `try`: each clause matches an operation
  by name and destructures its parameters (including `resume`/`tail`).

---

## Typing and Inference

- Function signatures use `: <effects> -> <return>`:

  ```voyd
  fn fetch(url: String): (Async, Log) -> Response
  fn parse(data: Bytes): () -> Json // explicit pure annotation
  ```

- If the effect annotation is omitted, the compiler infers effects from the
  body. Inference is fine inside a package, but exported APIs should be
  explicit to keep semver-stable surface areas. Any function exported by the
  API that does not explicitly define it's effects will be assumed pure,
  and will result in a compiler error if not all effects are handled.
- Handlers shrink effect rows. For example, `try ... with Async` yields a pure
  result if the handler covers all Async operations and does not re-raise.

---

## Polymorphic Effects

Higher-order utilities should pass through effects rather than invent new ones.
Voyd supports **effect row polymorphism** via `effects` parameters:

```voyd
// map does not add effects; it preserves whatever `f` does.
fn map<T, U>(
  items: Array<T>,
  f: fn(T) -> U,
): Array<U>
```

Effect parameters behave like type parameters:

- Declared alongside type parameters with the `effects` keyword when you need
  them explicitly.
- Omitted for callbacks when you want inference; the compiler effectively
  elaborates `fn map<T, U>(..., f: fn(T) -> U)` into
  `fn map<T, U, effects E>(..., f: fn(T): E -> U): E -> Array<U>`.
- You can still write the explicit form when you need to name/compose the
  effect row:

  ```voyd
  fn with_logging<effects E, T>(f: fn() -> T): (Log, E) -> T
  ```

- Are generalized when not constrained, enabling call-site inference.

### No call-stack poisoning

Effects from callbacks do not “infect” unrelated callers—only invoked effects
flow through the row, and you can keep higher-order utilities pure when they
don’t call the callback:

```voyd
// Stores handlers without invoking them: stays pure.
fn register(handler: fn() -> void): () -> void
  handlers.push(handler)

// Invokes the callback and transparently passes its effects through.
fn run(handler: fn() -> void)
  handler()

// Inference keeps this simple: no effect annotation, but `Async` flows through.
fn repeat_twice<T>(cb: fn() -> T): Array<T>
  [cb(), cb()]

fn main(): Async -> Array<i32>
  repeat_twice(() => Async::resolve(1))
```

This mirrors Effekt: a callback’s potential effects matter only when you run it.

### Handling callback effects inline

A function can also take a callback with an explicit effect and discharge it
itself, keeping its own row pure:

```voyd
eff Exception
  throw(resume, msg: String) -> void

fn with_default<T>(cb: fn(): Exception -> T, fallback: T): () -> T
  try
    cb()
  throw(resume):
    fallback
```

---

## Exports and Purity (`pkg.voyd`)

To keep package APIs explicit and auditable:

- Inside a package (anything not exported from `src/pkg.voyd`), you can rely on
  effect inference; explicit annotations are optional.
- In `src/pkg.voyd` (the public API per `visibility.md`), every exported
  function must either:
  - spell out its effects (including any `effects` parameters), or
  - be explicitly pure `()`.
  Omitting an effect annotation in `pkg.voyd` means “assume pure”; if the body
  is not pure, it is a compile-time error.
- Exported polymorphic functions must still declare their effect parameters:

  ```voyd
  pub fn transform<effects E, T>(f: fn(T): E -> T): E -> T
  ```

- A function that handles all effects internally can advertise purity by
  annotating `()` (even if effects were inferred in helpers it calls).

This keeps cross-package dependencies predictable and prevents accidental API
changes when internal implementations start using new effects.

---

## Host Boundary (Exports, Continuations, Buffer Protocol)

- Only pure exports are host-callable by default. If an export is effectful, you must either wrap it in a pure function or expose an explicit effectful entrypoint pair (snake case) that returns a struct (no multi-return):
  - Define `type EffectResult = { status: i32, cont: externref }`.
  - `pub fn main_effectful(buf_ptr: i32, buf_len: i32): EffectResult`
  - `pub fn resume_effectful(cont_ref: externref, buf_ptr: i32, buf_len: i32): EffectResult`
  - Accessors for hosts via primitives: `pub fn effect_status(res: EffectResult) -> i32`, `pub fn effect_cont(res: EffectResult) -> externref`.
- Status codes: `0` => value written to `(buf_ptr, buf_len)`, `1` => effect request written, negative => trap/diagnostic.
- Buffer contract (linear memory; MsgPack recommended):
  - `status=0`: `{ kind: "value", value }`
  - `status=1`: `{ kind: "effect", effectId, opId, resumeKind, args }` (args encoded as tuple/array)
- Continuations stay as Wasm GC refs (`externref`); JS holds the opaque ref and passes it back to `resume_effectful`, preventing premature collection.
- JS-side helpers use camelCase; Voyd exports stay snake_case.
- Effect/op ids map to names via the emitted effect/op table so hosts can dispatch on ids safely.
- Effect/op table export (data): header entries `{effectId, nameOffset, opsOffset, opCount}`, op entries `{opId, resumeKind, nameOffset}`, and a UTF-8 name blob; ids are stable in declaration order.
- Runtime-owned helpers (not user-defined): `handle_outcome`, `read_value`, and `resume_continuation` are emitted/linked by the compiler to implement the entry/resume protocol.
- Buffer overflow: writing past `buf_len` traps; hosts/harness should allocate sufficient space or retry with a larger buffer.

### Deterministic memory exports

- Memory exports are explicit and configurable:
  - `linearMemoryExport`: `"always" | "auto" | "off"` (default: `"always"`).
  - `effectsMemoryExport`: `"auto" | "always" | "off"` (default: `"auto"`).
- Default behavior:
  - `memory` is always exported.
  - `effects_memory` is exported only when effects runtime paths require it.
  - `effects_memory`, when exported, aliases `memory` (same linear memory).
- If `effects_memory` is exported, `memory` is also exported.

Commit message:

effects: add explicit try forward for partial handlers

packages/reference/docs/types/effects.md, after:

---
order: 280
---

# Effects

Effects are resumable exceptions. They capture side-effects in the type system
so that functions must either expose them in their signature or handle them.

Current backend status: Voyd currently materializes effects through the
`gc-trampoline` backend. The `stack-switch` backend is planned but not yet
implemented.

## At a Glance

- Effects bundle named operations that may suspend and resume execution.
- Operation behavior is signaled by the first parameter:
  - `resume` means resumable; the handler may resume zero or one time.
  - `tail` means tail-resumptive; the handler must resume exactly once before returning or propagating another effect.
- Function types carry an effect row: `fn load(): (Async, Log) -> Bytes`.
- Effects are inferred locally, but exported APIs should **spell them out** or
  handle everything and remain pure (`()`).
- Effect rows can be polymorphic: `fn map<effects E>(f: fn(T): E -> U): E -> Array<U>`.
- Handlers remove handled effects from the row; unhandled effects propagate.
- Effects don’t “poison” the call stack: higher-order code can stay pure and
  let callbacks carry or discharge their own effects.

Voyd's effect system takes heavy inspiration from:
- [Koka Language](https://koka-lang.github.io)
- [Effeckt Language](https://effekt-lang.org/)
- [Structured Asynchrony with Algebraic Effects (Daan Leijen)](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/asynceffects-msr-tr-2017-21.pdf)

---

## Declaring Effects

An effect is a set of named operations:

```voyd
eff Exception
  // Resumable operation; the handler may resume zero or one time.
  fn throw(resume, msg: String) -> void

// Single-operation shorthand
eff throw(resume, msg: String) -> void

eff State
  // Tail-resumptive operations; the handler will resume exactly once.
  fn get(tail) -> Int
  fn set(tail, x: Int) -> void

// Single-operation shorthand
eff get(tail) -> Int
```

Operations that start with a `resume` parameter expose the current continuation
to the handler and may be resumed zero or one time. Operations that start with a
`tail` parameter are tail-resumptive (like `await` or `yield from`) and are
guaranteed to resume exactly once by the handler before any clause exit or effect
propagation.

### Effect ID Convention

For public/stable effects, use dotted stable capability IDs:

```voyd
@effect(id: "voyd.std.fs")
eff Fs
```

Use this shape consistently:
- `"<owner>.<package>.<capability>"`
- `owner` is the organization/ecosystem namespace (`voyd` for std).
- `capability` is a stable semantic namespace, not a required mirror of file/module paths.
- Use lowercase ASCII tokens (`a-z0-9` + `.`).

Why this is preferred over reverse-DNS-like examples such as
`"com.example.generic"`:
- It aligns with Voyd imports and module organization.
- It is easier to grep, audit, and refactor in-repo.
- It keeps effect IDs predictable across std, compiler, SDK, and tests.
- It preserves external contracts even when modules are moved or renamed.

Stability rule:
- Once a public effect ID ships, treat it as persistent API surface and do not
  change it for internal refactors.

`"com.example.*"` IDs are still valid, but they are not the repository standard.

---

## Raising and Handling Effects

```voyd
eff Async
  await(tail) -> i32
  resolve(resume, value: i32) -> void
  reject(resume, msg: String) -> void

fn async_task(): Async -> i32
  let num = Async::await()
  if num > 0:
    Async::resolve(num)
  else:
    Async::reject("Number must be positive")

fn main(): () -> void
  try
    async_task(1)
  await(tail):
    tail(rand_int())
  resolve(resume, num):
    log("Resolved: " + num)
  reject(resume, msg):
    log("Rejected: " + msg)
```

Notes:
- Effect operations are invoked like static functions (`Async::resolve`), or by
  importing them: `use Async::{resolve, reject}`.
- `try` is strict by default: if any operation in a closed row is unhandled,
  type checking reports an error.
- Use `try forward` to handle selected operations and explicitly forward all
  remaining operations to the caller (they stay in the function's effect row).
- A handler may re-raise an effect (keeping it in the row) or fully discharge
  it.
- `resume` is one-shot: handlers may resume zero or one time; a second resume
  traps at runtime.
- `tail` resumes are strict: each `tail` continuation must be resumed exactly
  once before the clause returns or propagates another effect. Missing or double
  resumes trap at runtime.
- Handlers are written as clauses after `try`: each clause matches an operation
  by name and destructures its parameters (including `resume`/`tail`).

`try forward` example:

```voyd
fn run_partially(): (Async, Log) -> i32
  try forward
    let value = Async::await()
    Log::info("continuing")
    value
  Async::await(tail):
    tail(1)
```

---

## Typing and Inference

- Function signatures use `: <effects> -> <return>`:

  ```voyd
  fn fetch(url: String): (Async, Log) -> Response
  fn parse(data: Bytes): () -> Json // explicit pure annotation
  ```

- If the effect annotation is omitted, the compiler infers effects from the
  body. Inference is fine inside a package, but exported APIs should be
  explicit to keep semver-stable surface areas. Any function exported by the
  API that does not explicitly define it's effects will be assumed pure,
  and will result in a compiler error if not all effects are handled.
- Handlers shrink effect rows. A strict `try` yields a pure result when its
  clauses cover all performed operations and do not re-raise.
- `try forward` removes handled operations and keeps all remaining operations in
  the inferred row.

---

## Polymorphic Effects

Higher-order utilities should pass through effects rather than invent new ones.
Voyd supports **effect row polymorphism** via `effects` parameters:

```voyd
// map does not add effects; it preserves whatever `f` does.
fn map<T, U>(
  items: Array<T>,
  f: fn(T) -> U,
): Array<U>
```

Effect parameters behave like type parameters:

- Declared alongside type parameters with the `effects` keyword when you need
  them explicitly.
- Omitted for callbacks when you want inference; the compiler effectively
  elaborates `fn map<T, U>(..., f: fn(T) -> U)` into
  `fn map<T, U, effects E>(..., f: fn(T): E -> U): E -> Array<U>`.
- You can still write the explicit form when you need to name/compose the
  effect row:

  ```voyd
  fn with_logging<effects E, T>(f: fn() -> T): (Log, E) -> T
  ```

- Are generalized when not constrained, enabling call-site inference.

### No call-stack poisoning

Effects from callbacks do not “infect” unrelated callers—only invoked effects
flow through the row, and you can keep higher-order utilities pure when they
don’t call the callback:

```voyd
// Stores handlers without invoking them: stays pure.
fn register(handler: fn() -> void): () -> void
  handlers.push(handler)

// Invokes the callback and transparently passes its effects through.
fn run(handler: fn() -> void)
  handler()

// Inference keeps this simple: no effect annotation, but `Async` flows through.
fn repeat_twice<T>(cb: fn() -> T): Array<T>
  [cb(), cb()]

fn main(): Async -> Array<i32>
  repeat_twice(() => Async::resolve(1))
```

This mirrors Effekt: a callback’s potential effects matter only when you run it.

### Handling callback effects inline

A function can also take a callback with an explicit effect and discharge it
itself, keeping its own row pure:

```voyd
eff Exception
  throw(resume, msg: String) -> void

fn with_default<T>(cb: fn(): Exception -> T, fallback: T): () -> T
  try
    cb()
  throw(resume):
    fallback
```

---

## Exports and Purity (`pkg.voyd`)

To keep package APIs explicit and auditable:

- Inside a package (anything not exported from `src/pkg.voyd`), you can rely on
  effect inference; explicit annotations are optional.
- In `src/pkg.voyd` (the public API per `visibility.md`), every exported
  function must either:
  - spell out its effects (including any `effects` parameters), or
  - be explicitly pure `()`.
  Omitting an effect annotation in `pkg.voyd` means “assume pure”; if the body
  is not pure, it is a compile-time error.
- Exported polymorphic functions must still declare their effect parameters:

  ```voyd
  pub fn transform<effects E, T>(f: fn(T): E -> T): E -> T
  ```

- A function that handles all effects internally can advertise purity by
  annotating `()` (even if effects were inferred in helpers it calls).

This keeps cross-package dependencies predictable and prevents accidental API
changes when internal implementations start using new effects.

---

## Host Boundary (Exports, Continuations, Buffer Protocol)

- Only pure exports are host-callable by default. If an export is effectful, you must either wrap it in a pure function or expose an explicit effectful entrypoint pair (snake case) that returns a struct (no multi-return):
  - Define `type EffectResult = { status: i32, cont: externref }`.
  - `pub fn main_effectful(buf_ptr: i32, buf_len: i32): EffectResult`
  - `pub fn resume_effectful(cont_ref: externref, buf_ptr: i32, buf_len: i32): EffectResult`
  - Accessors for hosts via primitives: `pub fn effect_status(res: EffectResult) -> i32`, `pub fn effect_cont(res: EffectResult) -> externref`.
- Status codes: `0` => value written to `(buf_ptr, buf_len)`, `1` => effect request written, negative => trap/diagnostic.
- Buffer contract (linear memory; MsgPack recommended):
  - `status=0`: `{ kind: "value", value }`
  - `status=1`: `{ kind: "effect", effectId, opId, resumeKind, args }` (args encoded as tuple/array)
- Continuations stay as Wasm GC refs (`externref`); JS holds the opaque ref and passes it back to `resume_effectful`, preventing premature collection.
- JS-side helpers use camelCase; Voyd exports stay snake_case.
- Effect/op ids map to names via the emitted effect/op table so hosts can dispatch on ids safely.
- Effect/op table export (data): header entries `{effectId, nameOffset, opsOffset, opCount}`, op entries `{opId, resumeKind, nameOffset}`, and a UTF-8 name blob; ids are stable in declaration order.
- Runtime-owned helpers (not user-defined): `handle_outcome`, `read_value`, and `resume_continuation` are emitted/linked by the compiler to implement the entry/resume protocol.
- Buffer overflow: writing past `buf_len` traps; hosts/harness should allocate sufficient space or retry with a larger buffer.

### Deterministic memory exports

- Memory exports are explicit and configurable:
  - `linearMemoryExport`: `"always" | "auto" | "off"` (default: `"always"`).
  - `effectsMemoryExport`: `"auto" | "always" | "off"` (default: `"auto"`).
- Default behavior:
  - `memory` is always exported.
  - `effects_memory` is exported only when effects runtime paths require it.
  - `effects_memory`, when exported, aliases `memory` (same linear memory).
- If `effects_memory` is exported, `memory` is also exported.
