todo.md, before:

- Unsafe macros (As add unsafe macro and check safety macros that do a form of "unsafe" checking
  i.e. rust)
- Fix bug in modules where I can't run syntax macros directly on files within std
- Write up a layout spec defining exactly how parenthetical elision works
- Hygienic macros
- Consider making $() a block, rather than assuming a function call
- Develop and apply strict naming conventions for all APIs
- Develop best practices
- `def` macro like https://docs.racket-lang.org/guide/syntax-overview.html#%28part._.Definitions%29
- Adopt some conventions from https://docs.racket-lang.org/style/Textual_Matters.html like `!` and
  `?` conventions
- Flags for outputting AST and WAT
- Use tabstops (the thing that handles tab based comment alignment etc)
- Support struct field assignment via `=` operator
- Check mutability of struct before allowing modification (&mut semantics?)
- replace `quote splice-block` with `quote-splice` or something similar.
- Improve macro expansion algorithm so macros like `var` and `let` don't need to call
  `macro-expand`. Outside of `pub`, I don't believe any macro should need to call that function
  unless they need to extract info post expansion like `pub` does.
  https://stackoverflow.com/questions/72865649/how-does-macroexpansion-actually-work-in-lisp
- Rewrite reference manual.
- Consider using the struct syntax to define named arguments. See
  `archived-reference/functions.md#NamedArguments` for inspiration.
- Scoping. For macro expansion and compile time. Probably need a semantic analysis phase in general.
  Without this type-ids for structs are broken
- Type inference
- De-allocate allocated memory inside of blocks.
- Cleanup pass
  - Make typing of variables, functions and parameters much more clear and consistent, both
    at the `define-function` header level and body level.
  - Make spread of define-function, fn and lambda more consistent. They use a mix of either the last
    is a single expr, or a bunch of expressions

Commit message:

Squashed commit of the following:
commit f23f50a458d3c140973b42f49e7b6bfdb11e6899
Author: Drew Youngwerth <drew@youngwerth.com>
Date:   Mon Dec 26 16:28:07 2022 -0700

    Update TODO

commit 3c9e5760eaaa4aff9661da0f633099e40e97ca80
Author: Drew Youngwerth <drew@youngwerth.com>
Date:   Mon Dec 26 16:25:55 2022 -0700

    Fix remaining bugs, working compilation with inferred types

commit 3b0939e8e6a6a214c4bbc8b573cf1a60724e54c2
Author: Drew Youngwerth <drew@youngwerth.com>
Date:   Mon Dec 26 16:01:53 2022 -0700

    Support typed-block in wasm-code-gen

commit 629482368025464738e69456b520fd14078a3e8e
Author: Drew Youngwerth <drew@youngwerth.com>
Date:   Mon Dec 26 15:55:01 2022 -0700

    Working basic type inference and checking system.

commit 7e177682d3704f38e68f5794c89c8a1ee2ee33aa
Author: Drew Youngwerth <drew@youngwerth.com>
Date:   Mon Dec 26 14:31:58 2022 -0700

    Untested prototype

todo.md, after:

- Unsafe macros (As add unsafe macro and check safety macros that do a form of "unsafe" checking
  i.e. rust)
- Fix bug in modules where I can't run syntax macros directly on files within std
- Write up a layout spec defining exactly how parenthetical elision works
- Hygienic macros
- Consider making $() a block, rather than assuming a function call
- Develop and apply strict naming conventions for all APIs
- Develop best practices
- `def` macro like https://docs.racket-lang.org/guide/syntax-overview.html#%28part._.Definitions%29
- Adopt some conventions from https://docs.racket-lang.org/style/Textual_Matters.html like `!` and
  `?` conventions
- Flags for outputting AST and WAT
- Use tabstops (the thing that handles tab based comment alignment etc)
- Support struct field assignment via `=` operator
- Check mutability of struct before allowing modification (&mut semantics?)
- replace `quote splice-block` with `quote-splice` or something similar.
- Improve macro expansion algorithm so macros like `var` and `let` don't need to call
  `macro-expand`. Outside of `pub`, I don't believe any macro should need to call that function
  unless they need to extract info post expansion like `pub` does.
  https://stackoverflow.com/questions/72865649/how-does-macroexpansion-actually-work-in-lisp
- Rewrite reference manual.
- Consider using the struct syntax to define named arguments. See
  `archived-reference/functions.md#NamedArguments` for inspiration.
- Consider making `,` and ignored visual separator.
- Consider allowing struct literals to be passed as the equivalent to labeled arguments (but maybe allow mismatched ordering?)
- Scoping. For macro expansion and compile time. Probably need a semantic analysis phase in general.
  Without this type-ids for structs are broken
- De-allocate allocated memory inside of blocks.
- Cleanup pass
  - Make typing of variables, functions and parameters much more clear and consistent, both
    at the `define-function` header level and body level.
  - Make spread of define-function, fn and lambda more consistent. They use a mix of either the last
    is a single expr, or a bunch of expressions
- Reference Types (Boxes? / Mutable Borrows? / GC? / Ownership?)
- Test sub tuple init and assignment
- Copy CDTs on assignment
