packages/reference/docs/intrinsics.md, before:

---
order: 110
---

# Intrinsics

Intrinsics are built-in operations implemented by the compiler or runtime rather
than in userland Voyd code. They expose low-level capabilities (numeric ops,
array primitives, GC helpers) while still fitting into Voyd's type system and
codegen pipeline.

## How intrinsics are recognized

- Intrinsic status lives on symbol metadata. Functions become intrinsic by being
  annotated with `@intrinsic`.
- Raw low-level intrinsic names prefixed with `__` are **std-only**. Non-std
  packages cannot call them directly and cannot declare `@intrinsic(name:
  "__...")` wrappers.
- `@intrinsic` supports optional arguments:
  - `name`: the low-level intrinsic identifier to call. Defaults to the function
    name.
  - `uses_signature`: when `true`, the function types/validates using its
    declared signature (the body can call the intrinsic); when omitted/`false`,
    the call bypasses the signature and is validated by intrinsic rules
    (arity/type checks).
- Example wrappers:

```voyd
// Raw intrinsic: validated by intrinsic rules, body is ignored by typing/codegen.
@intrinsic(name: "__array_len")
fn len<T>(arr: FixedArray<T>) -> i32 __array_len(arr)

// Wrapper that uses the declared signature/body but keeps intrinsic metadata.
@intrinsic(name: "__array_get", uses_signature: true)
fn get<T>(arr: FixedArray<T>, index: i32) -> T
  __array_get(arr, index)
```

## Available intrinsics

The following intrinsic names are recognized by typing and codegen:

- Public language-level intrinsics:
  - Numeric arithmetic: `+`, `-`, `*`, `/` (i32, i64, f32, f64)
  - Modulo: `%` (i32, i64)
  - Numeric comparisons: `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=` (i32, i64, f32, f64)
  - Equality: `==`, `!=` (i32, i64, f32, f64, bool)
  - Boolean ops: `and`, `or`, `xor`, `not`

- Std-only low-level intrinsics (reserved for std):
  - `__array_new<T>(size: i32) -> FixedArray<T>`
  - `__array_new_fixed<T>(elements...) -> FixedArray<T>`
  - `__array_get<T>(array: FixedArray<T>, index: i32, [elementType, signed?]) -> T`
  - `__array_set<T>(array: FixedArray<T>, index: i32, value: T) -> FixedArray<T>`
  - `__array_len<T>(array: FixedArray<T>) -> i32`
  - `__array_copy<T>(dest: FixedArray<T>, srcIndex: i32, src: FixedArray<T>, srcOffset: i32, count: i32) -> FixedArray<T>`
    or options form with `from`, `to_index`, `from_index`, `count`
- GC/type helpers:
  - `__type_to_heap_type(type) -> heapref`

## Authoring and using intrinsic wrappers

- In non-std packages, wrap behavior using std APIs instead of raw `__*`
  intrinsic wrappers.
- In std, mark wrappers with `@intrinsic`; metadata flows through binding,
  lowering, typing, and codegen.
- For `uses_signature: true`, provide a normal Voyd signature/body—the compiler
  will type-check calls against it and still emit intrinsic code.
- For raw intrinsics (`uses_signature` omitted/false), calls must satisfy the
  intrinsic's arity and type rules regardless of the wrapper's signature/body.
- Intrinsic functions are not exported when compiling modules; they are
  consumed internally or via wrappers marked intrinsic.

### Migration guidance

- If you hit `TY0038` in a non-std package:
  - Remove `@intrinsic(name: "__...")` wrappers.
  - Import and call std wrappers (`std::fixed_array`, `std::array`,
    `std::memory`, etc.).
- If you called raw `__*` names directly, replace them with std APIs.

Commit message:

Add new numeric cast utils

packages/reference/docs/intrinsics.md, after:

---
order: 110
---

# Intrinsics

Intrinsics are built-in operations implemented by the compiler or runtime rather
than in userland Voyd code. They expose low-level capabilities (numeric ops,
array primitives, GC helpers) while still fitting into Voyd's type system and
codegen pipeline.

## How intrinsics are recognized

- Intrinsic status lives on symbol metadata. Functions become intrinsic by being
  annotated with `@intrinsic`.
- Raw low-level intrinsic names prefixed with `__` are **std-only**. Non-std
  packages cannot call them directly and cannot declare `@intrinsic(name:
  "__...")` wrappers.
- `@intrinsic` supports optional arguments:
  - `name`: the low-level intrinsic identifier to call. Defaults to the function
    name.
  - `uses_signature`: when `true`, the function types/validates using its
    declared signature (the body can call the intrinsic); when omitted/`false`,
    the call bypasses the signature and is validated by intrinsic rules
    (arity/type checks).
- Example wrappers:

```voyd
// Raw intrinsic: validated by intrinsic rules, body is ignored by typing/codegen.
@intrinsic(name: "__array_len")
fn len<T>(arr: FixedArray<T>) -> i32 __array_len(arr)

// Wrapper that uses the declared signature/body but keeps intrinsic metadata.
@intrinsic(name: "__array_get", uses_signature: true)
fn get<T>(arr: FixedArray<T>, index: i32) -> T
  __array_get(arr, index)
```

## Available intrinsics

The following intrinsic names are recognized by typing and codegen:

- Public language-level intrinsics:
  - Numeric arithmetic: `+`, `-`, `*`, `/` (i32, i64, f32, f64)
  - Modulo: `%` (i32, i64)
  - Numeric comparisons: `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=` (i32, i64, f32, f64)
  - Equality: `==`, `!=` (i32, i64, f32, f64, bool)
  - Boolean ops: `and`, `or`, `xor`, `not`

- Std-only low-level intrinsics (reserved for std):
  - `__array_new<T>(size: i32) -> FixedArray<T>`
  - `__array_new_fixed<T>(elements...) -> FixedArray<T>`
  - `__array_get<T>(array: FixedArray<T>, index: i32, [elementType, signed?]) -> T`
  - `__array_set<T>(array: FixedArray<T>, index: i32, value: T) -> FixedArray<T>`
  - `__array_len<T>(array: FixedArray<T>) -> i32`
  - `__array_copy<T>(dest: FixedArray<T>, srcIndex: i32, src: FixedArray<T>, srcOffset: i32, count: i32) -> FixedArray<T>`
    or options form with `from`, `to_index`, `from_index`, `count`
  - Numeric cast/conversion helpers:
    - `__i32_wrap_i64(i64) -> i32`
    - `__i64_extend_u(i32) -> i64`
    - `__i64_extend_s(i32) -> i64`
    - `__i32_trunc_f32_s(f32) -> i32`
    - `__i32_trunc_f64_s(f64) -> i32`
    - `__i64_trunc_f32_s(f32) -> i64`
    - `__i64_trunc_f64_s(f64) -> i64`
    - `__f32_convert_i32_s(i32) -> f32`
    - `__f32_convert_i64_s(i64) -> f32`
    - `__f64_convert_i32_s(i32) -> f64`
    - `__f64_convert_i64_s(i64) -> f64`
    - `__f32_demote_f64(f64) -> f32`
    - `__f64_promote_f32(f32) -> f64`
    - `__reinterpret_f32_to_i32(f32) -> i32`
    - `__reinterpret_i32_to_f32(i32) -> f32`
    - `__reinterpret_f64_to_i64(f64) -> i64`
    - `__reinterpret_i64_to_f64(i64) -> f64`
- GC/type helpers:
  - `__type_to_heap_type(type) -> heapref`

## Authoring and using intrinsic wrappers

- In non-std packages, wrap behavior using std APIs instead of raw `__*`
  intrinsic wrappers.
- In std, mark wrappers with `@intrinsic`; metadata flows through binding,
  lowering, typing, and codegen.
- For `uses_signature: true`, provide a normal Voyd signature/body—the compiler
  will type-check calls against it and still emit intrinsic code.
- For raw intrinsics (`uses_signature` omitted/false), calls must satisfy the
  intrinsic's arity and type rules regardless of the wrapper's signature/body.
- Intrinsic functions are not exported when compiling modules; they are
  consumed internally or via wrappers marked intrinsic.

### Migration guidance

- If you hit `TY0038` in a non-std package:
  - Remove `@intrinsic(name: "__...")` wrappers.
  - Import and call std wrappers (`std::fixed_array`, `std::array`,
    `std::memory`, etc.).
- If you called raw `__*` names directly, replace them with std APIs.
