reference/functions.md, before:

# Functions

## Function Basics

```voyd
fn add(a: i32, b: i32) -> i32
  a + b

// Usage
add(1, 2)

// Or with UFCS
1.add(2)
```

With return type inference:

```voyd
// Equal sign is used when the function is written on one line
fn add(a: i32, b: i32) = a + b

// = also works with return types and effects
fn fib() = test()
fn fib() -> i32 = test()
fn fib(): effect -> i32 = test()
```

With effects:

```voyd
fn get_json(address: String): Async -> Dictionary
  let json_text = await fetch(address)
  parse_json(json_text)

// Multiple effects may be specified in parenthesis
fn get_json(address: String): (Async, Throws) -> Dictionary
  let json_text = await fetch(address)
  parse_json(json_text)
```

## Labeled arguments

Labeled arguments can be defined by wrapping parameters curly braces.

```rust
fn add(a: i32, {to: i32}) = a + to

add(1, to: 2)
```

By default, the argument label is the same as the parameter name. You can
override this by specifying the label before the argument name.

```rust
fn add(a: i32, { to b: i32 }) = a + b

add(1, to: 2)
```

Labeled arguments can be thought of as syntactic sugar for defining a object
type parameter and destructuring it in the function body[1]:

```rust
fn move({ x: i32, y: i32, z: i32 }) -> void
  // ...

// Semantically equivalent to:
fn move(vec: { x: i32, y: i32, z: i32, }) -> void
  let { x, y, z } = vec
  // ...

move(x: 1, y: 2, z: 3)

// Equivalent to:
move({ x: 1, y: 2, z: 3 })
```

This allows you to still use object literal syntax for labeled arguments when
it might be cleaner to do so. For example, when the variable names match the
argument labels:

```rust
let (x, y, z) = (1, 2, 3)

// Object field shorthand allows for this:
move({ x, y, z })

// Which is better than
move(x: x, y: y, z: z)
```

Labeled arguments also support concise closure sugar on call sites:

```voyd
fn try({ do: ((): throws -> void), catch: (e: Error) -> void })

try do():
  this_may_throw()
catch(e):
  log e
```

[1] The compiler will typically optimize this away, so there is no performance
penalty for using labeled arguments.

## Uniform Function Call Syntax (Dot Notation)

The dot (or period) operator applies the expression on the left as an argument
of the expression on the right.

```
5.add(1)

// Becomes
add(5, 1)

// Parenthesis on the right expression are not required when the function only takes one argument
5.squared

// Becomes
squared(5)
```

See the chapter on [Syntax](./syntax.md) for more information.

## Generics

```rust
fn add<T>(a: T, b: T) -> T
  a + b
```

With trait constraints

```rust
fn add<T: Numeric>(a: T, b: T) -> T
  a + b
```

See the chapter on [Generics](./generics.md) for more information.


## Parenthetical Elision

When a function call is the top level call of its line, the parenthesis surrounding
the arguments (as well as the commas) can be elided.

```rust
fn add_three_numbers(a: i32, b: i32, c: i32) -> i32
  a + b + c

add_three_numbers 1 2 3
```

Indented lines are treated as blocks and supplied as arguments to the function
on the previous line

```rust
add_three_numbers 1 2
  let x = 1
  let y = 2
  x + y
```

This can be used to achieve trailing closures, much like swift:

```rust
fn call_with_5(f: (i32) -> void) -> void
  f(5)

call_with_5 (x) =>
  print(x)
```

By name parameters make this feature even more powerful:

```rust
fn eval_twice(@f: () -> void) -> void
  f()
  f()

fn main()
  var x = 0
  eval_twice
    x = x + 1
  print(x) // 2
```

Parenthetical elision also works with labeled arguments:

```rust
fn add(a: i32, {to: i32}) = a + to

add 1 to: 2
```

Labeled arguments may also be supplied on a new line on the same indentation
level as the function call provided no empty on that indentation level separate
the two:

```rust
add 1
to: 2
```

Labeled arguments can also be call by name parameters, which allows for the
implementation of a custom DSL for native like control flow:

```rust
fn my_if(@condition: () -> bool, {@then: () -> void, @else: () -> void}) -> void
  if condition then:
    then()
  else:
    else()

my_if true then:
  print("It's true!")
else:
  print("It's false!")
```

See the chapter on [Syntax](./syntax.md) for more information and detailed rules.

## Function Overloading

Voyd functions can be overloaded. Provided that function overload can be unambiguously distinguished via their parameters and return type.

```voyd
fn sum(a: i32, b: i32)
  print("Def 1")
  a + b

fn sum(vec: { a:i32, b: i32 })
  print("Def 2")
  vec.a + vec.b

sum a: 1, b: 2 // Def 1
sum { a: 1, b: 2 } // Def 2
```

This can be especially useful for overloading operators to support a custom
type:

```voyd
fn '+'(a: Vec3, b: Vec3) -> Vec3
  Vec3(a.x + b.x, a.y + b.y, a.z + b.z)

Vec3(1, 2, 3) + Vec3(4, 5, 6) // Vec3(5, 7, 9)
```

A function call is considered to be ambiguous when multiple functions in
the same scope share the same name, and the types of each parameter overlap
in order.

```voyd
fn add(a: i32, b: i32) -> i32
fn add(d: i32, e: i32) -> i32 // Ambiguous collision
fn add(f: i32, c: f32) -> i32 // This is fine, the second parameter does not overlap with previous
```

Object types overlap if one is an extension of the other:

```voyd
obj Animal {}
obj Dog: Animal {}
obj Cat: Animal {}

fn walk(animal: Animal)
fn walk(dog: Dog) // Ambiguous collision with walk(animal: Animal)

// Sibling types do not overlap
fn speak(cat: Cat)
fn speak(dog: Dog) // This is fine

// Labeled parameters can be to add an explicit distinction between two overlapping
// types, (provided they have different labels)
fn walk({animal: Animal})
fn walk({dog: Dog}) // This is fine, the label, dog, distinguishes this function from the previous

walk(dog: dexter) // Woof!
```

## Function Resolution

Commit message:

feat: support optional parameters (#282)
## Summary
- allow `param?: Type` declarations and track `isOptional`
- resolve optional parameters and arguments with `none()/some()`
coercions
- document optional parameters and add end-to-end tests

## Testing
- `npm test`


------
https://chatgpt.com/codex/tasks/task_e_68b93d9b15cc832ab04bdcc26ebc53e4

reference/functions.md, after:

# Functions

## Function Basics

```voyd
fn add(a: i32, b: i32) -> i32
  a + b

// Usage
add(1, 2)

// Or with UFCS
1.add(2)
```

With return type inference:

```voyd
// Equal sign is used when the function is written on one line
fn add(a: i32, b: i32) = a + b

// = also works with return types and effects
fn fib() = test()
fn fib() -> i32 = test()
fn fib(): effect -> i32 = test()
```

With effects:

```voyd
fn get_json(address: String): Async -> Dictionary
  let json_text = await fetch(address)
  parse_json(json_text)

// Multiple effects may be specified in parenthesis
fn get_json(address: String): (Async, Throws) -> Dictionary
  let json_text = await fetch(address)
  parse_json(json_text)
```

## Labeled arguments

Labeled arguments can be defined by wrapping parameters curly braces.

```rust
fn add(a: i32, {to: i32}) = a + to

add(1, to: 2)
```

By default, the argument label is the same as the parameter name. You can
override this by specifying the label before the argument name.

```rust
fn add(a: i32, { to b: i32 }) = a + b

add(1, to: 2)
```

Labeled arguments can be thought of as syntactic sugar for defining a object
type parameter and destructuring it in the function body[1]:

```rust
fn move({ x: i32, y: i32, z: i32 }) -> void
  // ...

// Semantically equivalent to:
fn move(vec: { x: i32, y: i32, z: i32, }) -> void
  let { x, y, z } = vec
  // ...

move(x: 1, y: 2, z: 3)

// Equivalent to:
move({ x: 1, y: 2, z: 3 })
```

This allows you to still use object literal syntax for labeled arguments when
it might be cleaner to do so. For example, when the variable names match the
argument labels:

```rust
let (x, y, z) = (1, 2, 3)

// Object field shorthand allows for this:
move({ x, y, z })

// Which is better than
move(x: x, y: y, z: z)
```

Labeled arguments also support concise closure sugar on call sites:

```voyd
fn try({ do: ((): throws -> void), catch: (e: Error) -> void })

try do():
  this_may_throw()
catch(e):
  log e
```

[1] The compiler will typically optimize this away, so there is no performance
penalty for using labeled arguments.

## Optional parameters

Parameters may be marked optional by adding `?` before the colon. The parameter's
type becomes [`Optional`](./types/objects.md#optional) of the specified type.

```voyd
fn greet(name: String, middle?: String)
  // middle has type Optional<String>
  match(middle)
    Some<String>:
      name + " " + middle.value
    None:
      name

greet("Ada")          // middle -> none()
greet("Ada", "Lovelace") // middle -> some("Lovelace")
```

When an optional parameter is omitted, `none()` is inserted automatically. When a
non-optional value is supplied, it is wrapped with `some(...)` at the call site.

## Uniform Function Call Syntax (Dot Notation)

The dot (or period) operator applies the expression on the left as an argument
of the expression on the right.

```
5.add(1)

// Becomes
add(5, 1)

// Parenthesis on the right expression are not required when the function only takes one argument
5.squared

// Becomes
squared(5)
```

See the chapter on [Syntax](./syntax.md) for more information.

## Generics

```rust
fn add<T>(a: T, b: T) -> T
  a + b
```

With trait constraints

```rust
fn add<T: Numeric>(a: T, b: T) -> T
  a + b
```

See the chapter on [Generics](./generics.md) for more information.


## Parenthetical Elision

When a function call is the top level call of its line, the parenthesis surrounding
the arguments (as well as the commas) can be elided.

```rust
fn add_three_numbers(a: i32, b: i32, c: i32) -> i32
  a + b + c

add_three_numbers 1 2 3
```

Indented lines are treated as blocks and supplied as arguments to the function
on the previous line

```rust
add_three_numbers 1 2
  let x = 1
  let y = 2
  x + y
```

This can be used to achieve trailing closures, much like swift:

```rust
fn call_with_5(f: (i32) -> void) -> void
  f(5)

call_with_5 (x) =>
  print(x)
```

By name parameters make this feature even more powerful:

```rust
fn eval_twice(@f: () -> void) -> void
  f()
  f()

fn main()
  var x = 0
  eval_twice
    x = x + 1
  print(x) // 2
```

Parenthetical elision also works with labeled arguments:

```rust
fn add(a: i32, {to: i32}) = a + to

add 1 to: 2
```

Labeled arguments may also be supplied on a new line on the same indentation
level as the function call provided no empty on that indentation level separate
the two:

```rust
add 1
to: 2
```

Labeled arguments can also be call by name parameters, which allows for the
implementation of a custom DSL for native like control flow:

```rust
fn my_if(@condition: () -> bool, {@then: () -> void, @else: () -> void}) -> void
  if condition then:
    then()
  else:
    else()

my_if true then:
  print("It's true!")
else:
  print("It's false!")
```

See the chapter on [Syntax](./syntax.md) for more information and detailed rules.

## Function Overloading

Voyd functions can be overloaded. Provided that function overload can be unambiguously distinguished via their parameters and return type.

```voyd
fn sum(a: i32, b: i32)
  print("Def 1")
  a + b

fn sum(vec: { a:i32, b: i32 })
  print("Def 2")
  vec.a + vec.b

sum a: 1, b: 2 // Def 1
sum { a: 1, b: 2 } // Def 2
```

This can be especially useful for overloading operators to support a custom
type:

```voyd
fn '+'(a: Vec3, b: Vec3) -> Vec3
  Vec3(a.x + b.x, a.y + b.y, a.z + b.z)

Vec3(1, 2, 3) + Vec3(4, 5, 6) // Vec3(5, 7, 9)
```

A function call is considered to be ambiguous when multiple functions in
the same scope share the same name, and the types of each parameter overlap
in order.

```voyd
fn add(a: i32, b: i32) -> i32
fn add(d: i32, e: i32) -> i32 // Ambiguous collision
fn add(f: i32, c: f32) -> i32 // This is fine, the second parameter does not overlap with previous
```

Object types overlap if one is an extension of the other:

```voyd
obj Animal {}
obj Dog: Animal {}
obj Cat: Animal {}

fn walk(animal: Animal)
fn walk(dog: Dog) // Ambiguous collision with walk(animal: Animal)

// Sibling types do not overlap
fn speak(cat: Cat)
fn speak(dog: Dog) // This is fine

// Labeled parameters can be to add an explicit distinction between two overlapping
// types, (provided they have different labels)
fn walk({animal: Animal})
fn walk({dog: Dog}) // This is fine, the label, dog, distinguishes this function from the previous

walk(dog: dexter) // Woof!
```

## Function Resolution
