reference/syntax.md, before:

# The Surface Language Syntax

The surface language is a superset of the core language (a minimalistic lisp
dialect). Its goal is to balance the power and simplicity of lisp with a more
modern python like feel.

On top of the syntax features supported by the core language syntax, the surface
language syntax supports:

-   Parenthetical ellison via syntactically significant whitespace
-   Standard function call syntax `f(x)`
-   Uniform function call syntax `hello.world()` -> `world(hello)`
-   Infix operators
-   Greedy identifiers
-   Macro expansion
-   Tuple, Struct, Array, and Dictionary literals etc

At its core, the surface language is still very lisp like. As in lisp,
everything built on a list. Any valid s-expression, is a valid Surface Language
Expression

# Parenthetical Elision

Void language is built around an s-expression syntax, like lisp:

```void
(if (n < 2)
  (: then n)
  (: else (+ (fib (- n 1)) (fib (- n 2)))))
```

To reduce visual noise, parenthesis can be elided, using tabs as a mechanism to
infer where the parenthesis should be inserted:

```void
if (n < 2)
  then: n
  else: (+ (fib (- n 1)) (fib (- n 2)))
```

This feature is inspired by [Scheme sweet-expressions](https://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-110/)

## Rules

1.  Any line with more than one symbol is wrapped in parenthesis.

  ```void
  add 1 2

  // Becomes
  (add 1 2)
  ```

2.  Indented lines are grouped together in a block and passed to their parent
  function call, provided the fist line is not a named argument.

  ```void
  add 2
    let x = 5
    mul 4 x

  // Becomes
  (add 2
    (block
      (let (= x 5))
      (mul 4 x)))
  ```

3.  Isolated labeled arguments, that is labeled arguments that are on their own
  line, are applied to the preceding function call provided:

  1. There are no empty lines separating the two
  2. The labeled argument is on the same indentation level, or 1 child
     indentation level as the preceding function call.

  ```
  if x > y then: 3
  else: 5

  // Becomes
  (if (> x y)
    (: then 3)
    (: else 5))

  // Another example
  if x > y
    then: 3
    else: 5

  // Becomes
  (if (x > y)
    (: then 3)
    (: else 5))
  ```

4.  Greedy operators (`=`, `=>`, `|>`, `<|`, `;` `|`) get special
  handling.

  1.  Greedy operators consume indented child blocks, rather than the parent
    function call

    ```
    let x =
      if (x > y)
        then: 3
        else: 5

    // Becomes
    (let (= x
      (block
        (if (> x y)
        (: then 3)
        (: else 5)))))
    ```

  2.  If an expression follows a greedy operator on the same line, a new line
    is inserted after the operator and each child line has an additional
    level of indentation supplied.

      ```
      let z = if x > y
        then: 3
        else: 5

      // Becomes
      let z =
        if x > y
          then: 3
          else: 5

      // Which in turn becomes
      (let (=
        z
        (block
          (if
            (> z y)
              (: then 3)
              (: else 5)))))
      ```

5. Arguments already wrapped in parenthesis must be separated by a comma

  ```void
  add(1, 2)

  // Becomes
  (add 1 2)

  add(sub 1 2, 3)

  // Becomes
  (add (sub 1 2) 3)
  ```


Examples:

```
if x > 3 then:
  do_work()
  blah()
else:
  do_other_work()

// Becomes
(if (> x 3)
  (: then (block
    do_work()
    blah()))
  (: else (block
    do_other_work())))

obj Pos
  x: (if x > 3 then: b else: c)
  y: 2
  z: 3

// Becomes
(obj Pos
  (: x (if (> x 3)
    (: then b)
    (: else c)))
  (: y 2)
  (: z 3))

obj Pos
x: 1
y: 2
z: 3

// Becomes
(obj Pos
  (: x 1)
  (: y 2)
  (: z 3))

let x = my_func(
  add 1 2,
  () =>
    hello(),
  3 + 4,
)

// Becomes
(let
  (=
  x
  (my_func
    (add 1 2)
    (=> () (block (hello)))
    (+ 3 4))))
```

# Standard Function Call Syntax

To make Void language feel more familiar to users familiar with C style
languages, Void supports standard function call syntax of the form `f(x)`.

## Rules

1.  Any identifier placed directly next to a list is inserted as the first
  argument of that list

```
add(1 2)

// Becomes
(add 1 2)

// Whitespace cancels this affect
add (1 2)

// Becomes
(add (1 2))
```

# Uniform Function Call Syntax (Dot Notation)

The dot (or period) operator applies the expression on the left as an argument
of the expression on the right.

```
5.add(1)

// Becomes
add(5 1)

// Parenthesis on the right expression are not required when the function only takes one argument
5.squared

// Becomes
squared(5)
```

# Labeled Argument Lambda Syntax

Labeled arguments have syntactic sugar that make passing lambda's much cleaner.

When the left hand side of the `:` operator is a list, the first identifier in
that list is treated as the name, additional identifiers become parameters.

```
fn call(cb: fn(v: i32) -> void)
  cb(5)

call cb(v):
  print(v)

// Equivalent to
call cb: (v) =>
  print
```

This works nicely with the rules of labeled arguments to support a trailing
lambda syntax similar to that of swift or koka.

```
try this():
  this_throws_an_error()
catch(e):
  print(e)

// Becomes
(try
  (: this (lambda () (block (this_throws_an_error))))
  (: catch (lambda (e) (block
    print(e)))))
```

# Infix Notation

Void supports infix notation using a predefined set of infix operators.

Operators, their precedence, and associativity (in typescript):

```typescript
/** Key is the operator, value is its [precedence, associativity] */
export const infixOperators = new Map<string, [number, Associativity]>([
  ["+", [1, "left"]],
  ["-", [1, "left"]],
  ["*", [2, "left"]],
  ["/", [2, "left"]],
  ["and", [0, "left"]],
  ["or", [0, "left"]],
  ["xor", [0, "left"]],
  ["as", [0, "left"]],
  ["is", [0, "left"]],
  ["in", [0, "left"]],
  ["==", [0, "left"]],
  ["!=", [0, "left"]],
  ["<", [0, "left"]],
  [">", [0, "left"]],
  ["<=", [0, "left"]],
  [">=", [0, "left"]],
  [".", [6, "left"]],
  ["|>", [4, "left"]],
  ["<|", [4, "right"]],
  ["|", [4, "right"]],
  ["=", [0, "left"]],
  ["+=", [4, "right"]],
  ["-=", [4, "right"]],
  ["*=", [4, "right"]],
  ["/=", [4, "right"]],
  ["=>", [5, "right"]],
  [":", [0, "left"]],
  ["::", [0, "left"]],
  [";", [4, "left"]],
  ["??", [3, "right"]],
  ["?:", [3, "right"]],
]);
```

## Rules

-   The infix operator must be surrounded by whitespace to be interpreted as an
  infix operation
-   If the infix operator is the first identifier in a list, s-expression syntax
  is used instead
-   Infix operators should use the same precedence and associative rules as
  JavaScript

# Terminal Identifier

Terminal identifiers do not need to be separated by a whitespace from other
identifiers.

They are any list of OpChars (see grammar) that start with one of the following
OpChars:

-   `.`, `:`, `;`, `?`, `\`, `!`, `&`, `|`

Note: Being a terminal operator does not imply infix

Commit message:

Voyd Rename (#49)
* Update references of project name to voyd

* Update uppercase references

* Rename files to voyd

* Fix imports etc

* Spelling fixes

reference/syntax.md, after:

# The Surface Language Syntax

The surface language is a superset of the core language (a minimalistic lisp
dialect). Its goal is to balance the power and simplicity of lisp with a more
modern python like feel.

On top of the syntax features supported by the core language syntax, the surface
language syntax supports:

-   Parenthetical ellison via syntactically significant whitespace
-   Standard function call syntax `f(x)`
-   Uniform function call syntax `hello.world()` -> `world(hello)`
-   Infix operators
-   Greedy identifiers
-   Macro expansion
-   Tuple, Struct, Array, and Dictionary literals etc

At its core, the surface language is still very lisp like. As in lisp,
everything built on a list. Any valid s-expression, is a valid Surface Language
Expression

# Parenthetical Elision

Voyd language is built around an s-expression syntax, like lisp:

```voyd
(if (n < 2)
  (: then n)
  (: else (+ (fib (- n 1)) (fib (- n 2)))))
```

To reduce visual noise, parenthesis can be elided, using tabs as a mechanism to
infer where the parenthesis should be inserted:

```voyd
if (n < 2)
  then: n
  else: (+ (fib (- n 1)) (fib (- n 2)))
```

This feature is inspired by [Scheme sweet-expressions](https://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-110/)

## Rules

1.  Any line with more than one symbol is wrapped in parenthesis.

  ```voyd
  add 1 2

  // Becomes
  (add 1 2)
  ```

2.  Indented lines are grouped together in a block and passed to their parent
  function call, provided the fist line is not a named argument.

  ```voyd
  add 2
    let x = 5
    mul 4 x

  // Becomes
  (add 2
    (block
      (let (= x 5))
      (mul 4 x)))
  ```

3.  Isolated labeled arguments, that is labeled arguments that are on their own
  line, are applied to the preceding function call provided:

  1. There are no empty lines separating the two
  2. The labeled argument is on the same indentation level, or 1 child
     indentation level as the preceding function call.

  ```
  if x > y then: 3
  else: 5

  // Becomes
  (if (> x y)
    (: then 3)
    (: else 5))

  // Another example
  if x > y
    then: 3
    else: 5

  // Becomes
  (if (x > y)
    (: then 3)
    (: else 5))
  ```

4.  Greedy operators (`=`, `=>`, `|>`, `<|`, `;` `|`) get special
  handling.

  1.  Greedy operators consume indented child blocks, rather than the parent
    function call

    ```
    let x =
      if (x > y)
        then: 3
        else: 5

    // Becomes
    (let (= x
      (block
        (if (> x y)
        (: then 3)
        (: else 5)))))
    ```

  2.  If an expression follows a greedy operator on the same line, a new line
    is inserted after the operator and each child line has an additional
    level of indentation supplied.

      ```
      let z = if x > y
        then: 3
        else: 5

      // Becomes
      let z =
        if x > y
          then: 3
          else: 5

      // Which in turn becomes
      (let (=
        z
        (block
          (if
            (> z y)
              (: then 3)
              (: else 5)))))
      ```

5. Arguments already wrapped in parenthesis must be separated by a comma

  ```voyd
  add(1, 2)

  // Becomes
  (add 1 2)

  add(sub 1 2, 3)

  // Becomes
  (add (sub 1 2) 3)
  ```


Examples:

```
if x > 3 then:
  do_work()
  blah()
else:
  do_other_work()

// Becomes
(if (> x 3)
  (: then (block
    do_work()
    blah()))
  (: else (block
    do_other_work())))

obj Pos
  x: (if x > 3 then: b else: c)
  y: 2
  z: 3

// Becomes
(obj Pos
  (: x (if (> x 3)
    (: then b)
    (: else c)))
  (: y 2)
  (: z 3))

obj Pos
x: 1
y: 2
z: 3

// Becomes
(obj Pos
  (: x 1)
  (: y 2)
  (: z 3))

let x = my_func(
  add 1 2,
  () =>
    hello(),
  3 + 4,
)

// Becomes
(let
  (=
  x
  (my_func
    (add 1 2)
    (=> () (block (hello)))
    (+ 3 4))))
```

# Standard Function Call Syntax

To make Voyd language feel more familiar to users familiar with C style
languages, Voyd supports standard function call syntax of the form `f(x)`.

## Rules

1.  Any identifier placed directly next to a list is inserted as the first
  argument of that list

```
add(1 2)

// Becomes
(add 1 2)

// Whitespace cancels this affect
add (1 2)

// Becomes
(add (1 2))
```

# Uniform Function Call Syntax (Dot Notation)

The dot (or period) operator applies the expression on the left as an argument
of the expression on the right.

```
5.add(1)

// Becomes
add(5 1)

// Parenthesis on the right expression are not required when the function only takes one argument
5.squared

// Becomes
squared(5)
```

# Labeled Argument Lambda Syntax

Labeled arguments have syntactic sugar that make passing lambda's much cleaner.

When the left hand side of the `:` operator is a list, the first identifier in
that list is treated as the name, additional identifiers become parameters.

```
fn call(cb: fn(v: i32) -> void)
  cb(5)

call cb(v):
  print(v)

// Equivalent to
call cb: (v) =>
  print
```

This works nicely with the rules of labeled arguments to support a trailing
lambda syntax similar to that of swift or koka.

```
try this():
  this_throws_an_error()
catch(e):
  print(e)

// Becomes
(try
  (: this (lambda () (block (this_throws_an_error))))
  (: catch (lambda (e) (block
    print(e)))))
```

# Infix Notation

Voyd supports infix notation using a predefined set of infix operators.

Operators, their precedence, and associativity (in typescript):

```typescript
/** Key is the operator, value is its [precedence, associativity] */
export const infixOperators = new Map<string, [number, Associativity]>([
  ["+", [1, "left"]],
  ["-", [1, "left"]],
  ["*", [2, "left"]],
  ["/", [2, "left"]],
  ["and", [0, "left"]],
  ["or", [0, "left"]],
  ["xor", [0, "left"]],
  ["as", [0, "left"]],
  ["is", [0, "left"]],
  ["in", [0, "left"]],
  ["==", [0, "left"]],
  ["!=", [0, "left"]],
  ["<", [0, "left"]],
  [">", [0, "left"]],
  ["<=", [0, "left"]],
  [">=", [0, "left"]],
  [".", [6, "left"]],
  ["|>", [4, "left"]],
  ["<|", [4, "right"]],
  ["|", [4, "right"]],
  ["=", [0, "left"]],
  ["+=", [4, "right"]],
  ["-=", [4, "right"]],
  ["*=", [4, "right"]],
  ["/=", [4, "right"]],
  ["=>", [5, "right"]],
  [":", [0, "left"]],
  ["::", [0, "left"]],
  [";", [4, "left"]],
  ["??", [3, "right"]],
  ["?:", [3, "right"]],
]);
```

## Rules

-   The infix operator must be surrounded by whitespace to be interpreted as an
  infix operation
-   If the infix operator is the first identifier in a list, s-expression syntax
  is used instead
-   Infix operators should use the same precedence and associative rules as
  JavaScript

# Terminal Identifier

Terminal identifiers do not need to be separated by a whitespace from other
identifiers.

They are any list of OpChars (see grammar) that start with one of the following
OpChars:

-   `.`, `:`, `;`, `?`, `\`, `!`, `&`, `|`

Note: Being a terminal operator does not imply infix
