docs/type-canonicalization-pass.md, before:

# Type Canonicalization Validator (Phase 3)

## Current Role

`canonicalizeResolvedTypes` now runs purely as a validation pass. It no longer rewrites the IR or attempts to collapse duplicate `Type` instances. Instead, the visitor traverses the resolved module, fingerprints every `VoydRefType`, and records structural collisions so later phases can introduce a real interner.

- **Read-only traversal.** Every `Type`, `Expr`, and metadata list is walked, but no collections are mutated and no references are swapped.
- **Fingerprint tracking.** The pass uses `typeKey` to build a fingerprint map. Whenever two distinct objects share a fingerprint, it records a `CanonicalTypeDedupeEvent`.
- **Diagnostics only.** Callers can supply a `CanonicalTypeTable` to retrieve the recorded events or attach an `onDuplicate` callback for ad‑hoc reporting. No alias registration or metadata merging occurs.
- **Idempotent validation.** Running the validator multiple times is effectively a no-op beyond re-emitting diagnostics; the module object graph remains untouched.

## Workflow Overview

1. **Traversal (`validateExpr`).** Walk every `Expr` in the module, following return types, parameter types, generic instances, trait implementations, and literal fields.
2. **Type validation (`validateType`).** For each `Type`, register the fingerprint, recurse into child types and type expressions, and capture contextual traces for debugging.
3. **Duplicate reporting.** When a fingerprint collision is discovered, the validator records a `CanonicalTypeDedupeEvent`, hydrates an optional issue callback, and (when `CANON_DEBUG` is set) logs a warning that includes the syntax ancestry for both contenders.
4. **Optional table integration.** If a `CanonicalTypeTable` is provided, the pass clears any previous log and replaces it with the collected events so downstream tools can analyse collisions without mutating the table’s cache.

## Integration Points

- `processSemantics` now invokes the validator for its side effects only and returns the original `VoydModule`. Nothing downstream depends on canonical identities yet.
- A feature flag (`processSemantics(parsed, { types: { useInterner: true } })`) threads the standalone interner through the resolver. When enabled, the validator feeds every discovered `Type` through the interner and reports `{ stats, events }` telemetry via the optional `onTelemetry` callback so tests can compare legacy and interned graphs without mutating production defaults.
- Unit tests can observe duplicates by either:
  1. Passing `onDuplicate` to accumulate `CanonicalizationIssue` objects (see `canonicalize-resolved-types.test.ts`), or
  2. Supplying a `CanonicalTypeTable` and reading `table.getDedupeEvents()` after validation (used by the e2e harness).
- The validator respects `CANON_DEBUG`, emitting descriptive console warnings without mutating the graph.

## Testing Status

- `src/semantics/types/__tests__/canonicalize-resolved-types.test.ts` now asserts that duplicate fingerprints are detected while the original references remain distinct.
- Canonical north-star suites (`map-recursive-union` variants) are locked behind `test.skip` with explicit “Phase 7” comments. They document the desired post-interner behaviour but intentionally remain inactive while the validator is read-only.
- E2E tests that previously relied on the mutation pass have been marked as future work; they still collect diagnostics (via tables) to monitor how many duplicates exist today.

## Using the Diagnostics

```ts
const table = new CanonicalTypeTable({ recordEvents: true });
const issues: CanonicalizationIssue[] = [];

canonicalizeResolvedTypes(module, {
  table,
  onDuplicate: (issue) => issues.push(issue),
});

console.log(table.getDedupeEvents().length, "duplicate fingerprints detected");
issues.forEach(({ fingerprint, canonicalContext, duplicateContext }) => {
  console.warn("collision", fingerprint, { canonicalContext, duplicateContext });
});
```

The example above keeps the module untouched but provides enough context to reason about which sites are still generating non-canonical copies.

## Looking Ahead

- **Phase 4:** Introduce a real type interner so duplicates are prevented at construction time instead of being diagnosed after the fact.
- **Phase 5–6:** Migrate metadata ownership (Binaryen caches, trait method tables, generic instance lists) to the canonical handles emitted by the interner.
- **Phase 7:** Re-enable the skipped tests and demonstrate that the recursive-union regressions disappear once codegen consumes canonical instances exclusively.

## Historical Context (Pre-Phase 3)

Earlier iterations of `canonicalizeResolvedTypes` attempted to rewrite the AST in place—merging metadata, reparenting generic instances, and updating `expr.type` references. That approach made it difficult to reason about mutation ordering, produced Binaryen cache corruption, and obscured the real sources of duplicate types. Phase 3 deliberately rolled the pass back to a validator so the next phases can rebuild canonicalization on top of a single, well-defined interner.

# Type Interner Prototype (Phase 4)

## Module Overview

`TypeInterner` replaces the ad-hoc post-processing experiments with a self-contained dedupe module. Instead of mutating the AST in place, it maintains a fingerprint → canonical map keyed by `typeKey` snapshots and keeps a per-instance alias cache so clone objects immediately reuse the first canonical handle.

- **Cycle aware.** Calls to `intern()` track the visitation stack and short-circuit when a type is already being resolved, preventing recursive unions from exploding the traversal.
- **Alias normalization.** `TypeAlias` nodes delegate to their resolved target before fingerprinting, so the canonical owner for a union fingerprint is always the union itself rather than an alias wrapper.
- **Pure stats surface.** `getStats()` reports `{ observed, canonical, reused }` so callers can monitor how many types the interner touched, while `getEvents()` exposes the exact reuse events (fingerprint plus winner/loser references) for debugging.
- **No legacy metadata hooks.** The module does not merge Binaryen caches, generic instance arrays, or trait metadata. It focuses solely on returning stable references; follow-on phases will migrate metadata once the interner is wired through semantics.

## Harness

Two harness helpers make it easy to exercise the interner without touching the production pipeline:

- `runTypeInternerOnModule(module, opts)` traverses an in-memory `VoydModule`, feeding every encountered `Type` through the interner by way of the validator’s new `onType` callback.
- `runTypeInternerFromSource(source, opts)` parses a `.voyd` program, runs the existing resolver stack, and then returns `{ root, interner, stats, events }` so tests can assert on the dedupe results.

Both helpers default to `recordEvents: true`, which keeps the event log available for assertions and debugging.

## Test Coverage

- **Unit tests.** `src/semantics/types/__tests__/type-interner.test.ts` verifies that identical recursive unions and structural objects collapse to shared instances, and that the harness can walk a synthetic module without touching codegen.
- **E2E guard.** `src/__tests__/type-interner.e2e.test.ts` runs the harness against `run-wasm-regression.voyd`, asserting that the interner observes >1 000 types, canonically dedupes a few hundred of them, and records the corresponding fingerprint reuse events. The same suite still executes `runWasm` to document the current `RuntimeError: illegal cast` failure, keeping Phase 4 honest about outstanding runtime gaps.

## Usage Example

```ts
import { canonicalizeResolvedTypes } from "../semantics/types/canonicalize-resolved-types.js";
import { TypeInterner } from "../semantics/types/type-interner.js";

const interner = new TypeInterner({ recordEvents: true });
canonicalizeResolvedTypes(module, {
  onType: (type) => interner.intern(type),
});

const stats = interner.getStats();
console.log("observed", stats.observed, "canonical", stats.canonical);
```

The snippet keeps the semantics pipeline untouched while exercising the interner on a fully resolved module. The resulting stats can be snapshot in tests or logged during investigation runs. Early runs against the wasm regression fixture report roughly 1 300 observed types with ~1 100 reuse hits, providing a quantitative baseline for later phases.

Commit message:

Activate type interner by default

docs/type-canonicalization-pass.md, after:

# Type Canonicalization Validator (Phase 3)

## Current Role

`canonicalizeResolvedTypes` now runs purely as a validation pass. It no longer rewrites the IR or attempts to collapse duplicate `Type` instances. Instead, the visitor traverses the resolved module, fingerprints every `VoydRefType`, and records structural collisions so later phases can introduce a real interner.

- **Read-only traversal.** Every `Type`, `Expr`, and metadata list is walked, but no collections are mutated and no references are swapped.
- **Fingerprint tracking.** The pass uses `typeKey` to build a fingerprint map. Whenever two distinct objects share a fingerprint, it records a `CanonicalTypeDedupeEvent`.
- **Diagnostics only.** Callers can supply a `CanonicalTypeTable` to retrieve the recorded events or attach an `onDuplicate` callback for ad‑hoc reporting. No alias registration or metadata merging occurs.
- **Idempotent validation.** Running the validator multiple times is effectively a no-op beyond re-emitting diagnostics; the module object graph remains untouched.

## Workflow Overview

1. **Traversal (`validateExpr`).** Walk every `Expr` in the module, following return types, parameter types, generic instances, trait implementations, and literal fields.
2. **Type validation (`validateType`).** For each `Type`, register the fingerprint, recurse into child types and type expressions, and capture contextual traces for debugging.
3. **Duplicate reporting.** When a fingerprint collision is discovered, the validator records a `CanonicalTypeDedupeEvent`, hydrates an optional issue callback, and (when `CANON_DEBUG` is set) logs a warning that includes the syntax ancestry for both contenders.
4. **Optional table integration.** If a `CanonicalTypeTable` is provided, the pass clears any previous log and replaces it with the collected events so downstream tools can analyse collisions without mutating the table’s cache.

## Integration Points

- `processSemantics` now invokes the validator for its side effects only and returns the original `VoydModule`. Nothing downstream depends on canonical identities yet.
- The semantics pipeline instantiates the type interner by default. Every type encountered during resolution (and again during validation) flows through `TypeContext.internType`, and callers can opt-in to `{ stats, events }` telemetry via the optional `onTelemetry` callback without flipping any feature flags.
- Unit tests can observe duplicates by either:
  1. Passing `onDuplicate` to accumulate `CanonicalizationIssue` objects (see `canonicalize-resolved-types.test.ts`), or
  2. Supplying a `CanonicalTypeTable` and reading `table.getDedupeEvents()` after validation (used by the e2e harness).
- The validator respects `CANON_DEBUG`, emitting descriptive console warnings without mutating the graph.

## Testing Status

- `src/semantics/types/__tests__/canonicalize-resolved-types.test.ts` now asserts that duplicate fingerprints are detected while the original references remain distinct.
- Canonical north-star suites (`map-recursive-union` variants) are locked behind `test.skip` with explicit “Phase 7” comments. They document the desired post-interner behaviour but intentionally remain inactive while the validator is read-only.
- E2E tests that previously relied on the mutation pass have been marked as future work; they still collect diagnostics (via tables) to monitor how many duplicates exist today.

## Using the Diagnostics

```ts
const table = new CanonicalTypeTable({ recordEvents: true });
const issues: CanonicalizationIssue[] = [];

canonicalizeResolvedTypes(module, {
  table,
  onDuplicate: (issue) => issues.push(issue),
});

console.log(table.getDedupeEvents().length, "duplicate fingerprints detected");
issues.forEach(({ fingerprint, canonicalContext, duplicateContext }) => {
  console.warn("collision", fingerprint, { canonicalContext, duplicateContext });
});
```

The example above keeps the module untouched but provides enough context to reason about which sites are still generating non-canonical copies.

## Looking Ahead

- **Phase 4:** Introduce a real type interner so duplicates are prevented at construction time instead of being diagnosed after the fact.
- **Phase 5:** Migrate metadata ownership (Binaryen caches, trait method tables, generic instance lists) to the canonical handles emitted by the interner.
- **Phase 7:** Re-enable the skipped tests and demonstrate that the recursive-union regressions disappear once codegen consumes canonical instances exclusively.

## Historical Context (Pre-Phase 3)

Earlier iterations of `canonicalizeResolvedTypes` attempted to rewrite the AST in place—merging metadata, reparenting generic instances, and updating `expr.type` references. That approach made it difficult to reason about mutation ordering, produced Binaryen cache corruption, and obscured the real sources of duplicate types. Phase 3 deliberately rolled the pass back to a validator so the next phases can rebuild canonicalization on top of a single, well-defined interner.

# Type Interner Prototype (Phase 4)

## Module Overview

`TypeInterner` replaces the ad-hoc post-processing experiments with a self-contained dedupe module. Instead of mutating the AST in place, it maintains a fingerprint → canonical map keyed by `typeKey` snapshots and keeps a per-instance alias cache so clone objects immediately reuse the first canonical handle.

- **Cycle aware.** Calls to `intern()` track the visitation stack and short-circuit when a type is already being resolved, preventing recursive unions from exploding the traversal.
- **Alias normalization.** `TypeAlias` nodes delegate to their resolved target before fingerprinting, so the canonical owner for a union fingerprint is always the union itself rather than an alias wrapper.
- **Pure stats surface.** `getStats()` reports `{ observed, canonical, reused }` so callers can monitor how many types the interner touched, while `getEvents()` exposes the exact reuse events (fingerprint plus winner/loser references) for debugging.
- **No legacy metadata hooks.** The module does not merge Binaryen caches, generic instance arrays, or trait metadata. It focuses solely on returning stable references; follow-on phases will migrate metadata once the interner is wired through semantics.

## Harness

Two harness helpers make it easy to exercise the interner without touching the production pipeline:

- `runTypeInternerOnModule(module, opts)` traverses an in-memory `VoydModule`, feeding every encountered `Type` through the interner by way of the validator’s new `onType` callback.
- `runTypeInternerFromSource(source, opts)` parses a `.voyd` program, runs the existing resolver stack, and then returns `{ root, interner, stats, events }` so tests can assert on the dedupe results.

Both helpers default to `recordEvents: true`, which keeps the event log available for assertions and debugging.

## Test Coverage

- **Unit tests.** `src/semantics/types/__tests__/type-interner.test.ts` verifies that identical recursive unions and structural objects collapse to shared instances, and that the harness can walk a synthetic module without touching codegen.
- **E2E guard.** `src/__tests__/type-interner.e2e.test.ts` runs the harness against `run-wasm-regression.voyd`, asserting that the interner observes >1 000 types, canonically dedupes a few hundred of them, and records the corresponding fingerprint reuse events. The same suite still executes `runWasm` to document the current `RuntimeError: illegal cast` failure, keeping Phase 4 honest about outstanding runtime gaps.

## Usage Example

```ts
import { canonicalizeResolvedTypes } from "../semantics/types/canonicalize-resolved-types.js";
import { TypeInterner } from "../semantics/types/type-interner.js";

const interner = new TypeInterner({ recordEvents: true });
canonicalizeResolvedTypes(module, {
  onType: (type) => interner.intern(type),
});

const stats = interner.getStats();
console.log("observed", stats.observed, "canonical", stats.canonical);
```

The snippet keeps the semantics pipeline untouched while exercising the interner on a fully resolved module. The resulting stats can be snapshot in tests or logged during investigation runs. Early runs against the wasm regression fixture report roughly 1 300 observed types with ~1 100 reuse hits, providing a quantitative baseline for later phases.

# Interner Default Activation (Phase 6)

Phase 6 removes the legacy clone-based type path entirely. The semantics pipeline now wires the interner through every construction site and treats the canonical handle as the source of truth for metadata.

- **No more feature flag.** `processSemantics` always constructs a `TypeContext` with an active interner. The optional `internDuringResolution` toggle remains available for tests, but production builds intern during resolution and validation automatically.
- **Canonical metadata only.** `ObjectType.registerGenericInstance` and `TraitType.registerGenericInstance` record canonical instances exclusively, delegating dedupe to the interner and refusing to attach loser clones to `genericInstances`.
- **Optional tooling hard-fails on divergence.** `scripts/inspect-optional-constructors.ts` now throws when Optional constructors drift from their canonical parents, and `collectOptionalConstructors` no longer normalizes via orphan snapshots.
- **Regression guardrails.** `map-recursive-union` integration tests assert that every Optional specialization remains registered on the canonical parent, preventing the resolver from leaking duplicate constructor nodes back into the AST.
